Introduction to Bash & The Command Line
====

The *command line* is a text based interface to your computer. Like a *graphical user interface*, the command line provides access to programs and documents, but instead of working with icons and editing documents using windows, buttons and menus with a keyboard and mouse, the command line requires keyboard input only and displays only text.

A command is just a small program, like a program that you execute from the Start menu or the Finder, but it typically does only one thing and quits when it is finished with that one thing, instead of waiting for additional input from you.

To begin working with the command line, run *Git Bash* from the Start menu in Windows or the *Terminal* program in the main Applications / Utilities folder on a Mac. If you've installed *iTerm* you may use that instead.

After launching the terminal you are presented with the *terminal prompt* waiting for a command to execute:

	mbp-phil:~ okcoders$

Using the command line is straightforward. At the prompt, enter the command you would like to execute with any options or arguments. The general format looks like:

	command -options arguments

What makes the command line difficult is that you must learn and remember what commands to execute and what options and arguments they take. With a graphical user interface you can easily recognize what you need to do. We'll learn a number of basic commands below.

# References

[The Linux Command Line, by William Shots](http://linuxcommand.org/tlcl.php) is an excellent book on the command line available as a free PDF download. I highly recommend it.

# Basic Commands

## echo

Echoes text back to the terminal prompt. Echo is a good example of using a command with an argument:

	$ echo "just what I typed back to the screen"
	just what I typed back to the screen

You must use quotes with arguments that included spaces. Spaces are significant characters on the command line and are used to separate arguments from one another.

Note that I've elided the additional text that appears to the left of the dollar sign `$`. This will be different from computer to computer but usually includes the hostname (computer name) and the folder that is your current working directory.

## pwd

Speaking of your current working directory, `pwd` prints the current working directory. The working directory is the folder in which all your commands will be executed. Any files you create or try to read will be done in this directory. It's like the folder you currently have open in the Finder or in Explorer.

When you first start up your command prompt, your working directory will be your *home* directory:

	$ pwd
	/Users/okcoders		
	
Your home directory contains all your personal documents, settings and other files.	

## ls

Lists the contents of a directory. Without any arguments, it lists the contents of the current working directory:

	$ ls
	Applications	Documents	Library		Music	Public	Desktop		Downloads	Movies	Pictures

You can include options when running a command to change its behavior. Use a dash (minus sign) followed by a character that specifies the option. These are sometimes called *flags*. We can pass the `-l` flag to `ls` to show the long listing, which includes additional information about the files. 

	$ ls -l
	total 0
	drwx------   3 okcoders  staff   102 May 30 12:57 Applications
	drwx------+  3 okcoders  staff   102 May 30 12:48 Desktop
	drwx------+  4 okcoders  staff   136 May 31 14:38 Documents
	drwx------+  4 okcoders  staff   136 May 30 12:48 Downloads
	drwx------@ 46 okcoders  staff  1564 May 31 17:55 Library
	drwx------+  3 okcoders  staff   102 May 30 12:48 Movies
	drwx------+  3 okcoders  staff   102 May 30 12:48 Music
	drwx------+  4 okcoders  staff   136 May 31 14:37 Pictures
	drwxr-xr-x+  5 okcoders  staff   170 May 30 12:48 Public
	
The long listing shows file permissions on the far left, tells us if the file is a directory or a program, and gives us the filesize and the date last modified.

We can also have `ls` show us hidden files with the `-a` flag. It's useful to combine this with the long listing option. When we combine options we only need to use the dash once followed immediately by each letter, for example `-al`:

	$ ls -al
	total 64
	drwxr-xr-x+ 23 okcoders  staff   782 May 31 17:52 .
	drwxr-xr-x   6 root      admin   204 May 30 12:48 ..
	-rw-------   1 okcoders  staff     3 May 30 12:48 .CFUserTextEncoding
	-rw-r--r--@  1 okcoders  staff  6148 May 31 17:55 .DS_Store
	drwx------   2 okcoders  staff    68 May 31 17:52 .Trash
	-rw-------   1 okcoders  staff  2372 May 31 17:51 .bash_history
	-rw-r--r--   1 okcoders  staff    48 May 30 13:29 .bash_profile
	-rw-r--r--   1 okcoders  staff   145 May 31 14:54 .bashrc
	-rw-r--r--   1 okcoders  staff    52 May 30 17:38 .gitconfig
	drwxr-xr-x   6 okcoders  staff   204 May 31 15:08 .heroku
	-rw-------   1 okcoders  staff   201 May 31 14:39 .netrc
	drwxr-xr-x  65 okcoders  staff  2210 May 31 14:55 .npm
	drwx------   5 okcoders  staff   170 May 30 17:40 .ssh
	-rw-------   1 okcoders  staff  1742 May 31 14:58 .viminfo
	drwx------   3 okcoders  staff   102 May 30 12:57 Applications
	drwx------+  3 okcoders  staff   102 May 30 12:48 Desktop
	drwx------+  4 okcoders  staff   136 May 31 14:38 Documents
	drwx------+  4 okcoders  staff   136 May 30 12:48 Downloads
	drwx------@ 46 okcoders  staff  1564 May 31 17:55 Library
	drwx------+  3 okcoders  staff   102 May 30 12:48 Movies
	drwx------+  3 okcoders  staff   102 May 30 12:48 Music
	drwx------+  4 okcoders  staff   136 May 31 14:37 Pictures
	drwxr-xr-x+  5 okcoders  staff   170 May 30 12:48 Public
	
Notice the additional files that appear with the `.` prefix. The `.` prefix tells us the files are hidden and will not normally appear in the Terminal or in the Finder or Explorer.

The two additional entries at the top, `.` and `..` are special constructions to indicate the current directory and the directory one level up, respectively.

We can list the contents of another directory by passing it as an argument to `ls`. I have one item in my *Documents* directory named *OK-Coders*:

	$ ls Documents/
	OK-Coders
	
I can list the contents of OK-Coders by passing the full filepath *Documents/Ok-Coders*. Note the use of the forward slash to separate the folder names.

	$ ls Documents/OK-Coders/
	1-bash-heroku
	
## cd

Changes the current working directory. Normally you will pass a folder path to the command which identifies the directory you want to change to:

	$ mbp-phil:~$ cd Documents/
	mbp-phil:Documents okcoders$ pwd
	/Users/okcoders/Documents

Notice that the prompt before the dollar sign, which I have included here, shows that I am now in the Documents directory after I `cd` to it: *mbp-phil:Documents*. Prior to changing directories, the prompt showed *mbp-phil:~*.

Often we'll want to move back one level up the directory hierarchy, returning to the folder that contains the directory we're now in. Use the `..` construction to do this:

	mbp-phil:Documents okcoders$ cd ..
	mbp-phil:~ okcoders$ pwd
	/Users/okcoders

If you were in the *Documents* folder, `cd ..` returns you to the home directory, which contains it.

The `~`, or *tilde*, is a special symbol in the terminal which stands for your home directory. Use `~` like you would the name of a folder, and it acts as a shortcut to your home directory:

	mbp-phil:Documents okcoders$ cd ~
	mbp-phil:~ okcoders$ pwd
	/Users/okcoders
	
Using the tilde like this makes it easy to return to our home directory quickly. But actually we can already do this with `cd` when we pass it no arguments:

	mbp-phil:~ okcoders$ cd ~/Documents/OK-Coders/1-bash-heroku/
	mbp-phil:1-bash-heroku okcoders$ pwd
	/Users/okcoders/Documents/OK-Coders/1-bash-heroku
	mbp-phil:1-bash-heroku okcoders$ cd
	mbp-phil:~ okcoders$ pwd
	/Users/okcoders
	
I've included the hostname and currect directory in the prompt to show how it changes in response to these commands.
	
## mkdir

Creates a folder just like creating a new folder in the Finder or in Explorer. Pass it the name of the folder you want to create:

	$ mkdir "OK-Coders"
	$ ls
	Applications	Documents	Library		Music	Pictures	Desktop		Downloads	Movies	OK-Coders	Public

Notice that *OK-Coders* now appears in my home folder, and we'll see it from the Finder or Explorer as well. It exists on my computer like any other folder.

Notice that I put the name of the folder in quotes. This is optional when the name does not contain any spaces or other special characters. Otherwise you must use quotes for the name. The applies to all commands that take arguments.

Create many directories at the same time by passing thier names to `mkdir`, separated by a space:

	$ mkdir dir1 dir2 dir3
	$ ls
	Applications	Documents	Library		Music	Public		dir2	Desktop		Downloads	Movies	Pictures	dir1		dir3

## rmdir

Removes the directory specified. Go ahead and remove the *OK-Coders* directory you just created:

	$ rmdir OK-Coders/
	$ ls
	Applications	Documents	Library		Music	Public	Desktop		Downloads	Movies		Pictures
	
It's gone! Remove many directories at the same time by providing their names, separated by a space:

	$ rmdir dir1 dir2 dir3
	$ ls
	Applications	Documents	Library		Music	Public	Desktop		Downloads	Movies		Pictures

Normally you won't use the `rmdir` command; you'll use the `rm` command instead. See below for details.

## touch

Changes the date modified property of a file and is often used to create an empty file. We'll normally use it to create new, empty files:

	$ touch newfile.txt
	$ ls
	Applications	Documents	Library		Music	Public	Desktop		Downloads	Movies		Pictures	newfile.txt
	
## rm

Remove a file or directory, that is, delete it. Remove the *newfile.txt* file you just created:

	$ rm newfile.txt
	$ ls
	Applications	Documents	Library		Music	Public	Desktop		Downloads	Movies		Pictures

Removing a directory is not as straightforward. Create a new directory called *test* and try to remove it with `rm`:

	$ mkdir test
	$ ls
	Applications	Documents	Library		Music	Public	Desktop		Downloads	Movies		Pictures	test
	$ rm test
	rm: test: is a directory

Without passing additional options, `rm` will not delete a diretory. It returns the error, *test: is a directory*. To delete a directory, include the `-r` option, which tells `rm` to empty the contents of the directory first and then delete the directory:

	$ rm -r test
	$ ls
	Applications	Documents	Library		Music	Public	Desktop		Downloads	Movies		Pictures

Sometimes it may be necessary to include the `-f` flag to force `rm` to recursively delete a directory. `-f` *forces* the directory contents to be deleted if they wouldn't otherwise be. 

Be careful with `rm`. The command line assumes you know what you are doing. It will not ask if you are sure you want to execute a command, and commands cannot be undone. When you remove a file or folder, it is gone.

A safer way to use the `rm` command inlcudes the `-i` flag. With *interactivity* enabled, `rm` will ask for confirmation before deleting any file. Type `y` or `n` and enter to confirm or cancel the deletion:

	$ rm -i file.txt
	remove file.txt? y

## mv

Move a file or directory. `mv` is also used to rename files.

Create a new folder called *myfolder* and create a new empty file called *newfile.txt*:

	$ mkdir myfolder
	$ touch newfile.txt

The `mv` command requires two arguments. The first is the file or folder you want to move and is called the *source*. The second is the *destination*. It looks like:

	mv source destination

If the destination is a folder, `mv` will move the source into the destination and keep its name. If the destination includes a filename, `mv` will place the source into the destination folder and rename it.

Move *newfile.txt* into *myfolder*:

	$ mv newfile.txt myfolder/
	$ ls myfolder/
	newfile.txt
	
Now move *newfile.txt* back into the current directory without leaving the current directory:

	$ mv myfolder/newfile.txt .

Notice the use of the `.` to represent the current directory.

Now move *newfile.txt* into *myfolder* while simultaneously renaming it to *renamed.txt*:

	$ mv newfile.txt myfolder/renamed.txt
	$ ls myfolder/
	renamed.txt

Notice that the difference is we included a new filename in the *destination* argument.

`mv` is also used to rename files. There is no rename command. To rename a file, just move it into the same directory while giving it a different name.

Go into *myfolder* and rename *renamed.txt* back to *newfile.txt*:

	$ cd myfolder/
	$ ls
	renamed.txt
	$ mv renamed.txt newfile.txt
	$ ls
	newfile.txt

## cp

Copy a file or directory. `cp` expect a source and target arguments with the following format:

	cp source target

The source is the file you to copy and the target is its new location.
 
Use a fully specified pathname to copy a file and rename it at the same time, provide only a target folder to copy a file to that folder while keeping its name, or provide just a new name to copy the file to the same directory.

For example, copy *myfile.txt* to *copy.txt* in the same directory:

	$ cp myfile.txt copy.txt
	$ ls
	copy.txt	myfile.txt

Copy a directory and all its contents with the `-r` flag.

## cat

Concatenate and print files. `cat` allows us to modify files from the command line and to quickly view the contents of files. We'll learn how to modify files in a later lesson. Here is how you view the contents of a file:

	$ cat newfile.txt
	This is a file with some text in it.
	Cat the file to view its contents

## head

Prints the first lines of a file to the terminal. `head` is like `cat` but is used to peak at the beginning of a file:

	$ head newfile.txt
	This is a file with some text in it.
	Cat the file to view its contents

Pass the `-n` flag with a number to specify how many lines you'd like to preview:

	$ head -n 1 newfile.txt
	This is a file with some text in it.

## tail

Prints the last lines of a file to the terminal. `tail` is like `cat` but is used to peak at the end of a file:

	$ tail newfile.txt
	This is a file with some text in it.
	Cat the file to view its contents

Pass the `-n` flag with a number to specify how many lines you'd like to preview:

	$ tail -n 1 newfile.txt
	Cat the file to view its contents

## which

Indicates which executable will be used for a program and where it is located. Use `which` to confirm that you have installed a command line program:

	$ which node
	/usr/local/bin/node
	$ which express
	/usr/local/bin/express
	
## man

Displays the manual for a command, showing all the options and arguments a command takes. Use `man` when you're stuck!

	mbp-phil:~ okcoders$ man which
	WHICH(1)                  BSD General Commands Manual                 WHICH(1)
	
	NAME
	     which -- locate a program file in the user's path
	
	SYNOPSIS
	     which [-as] program ...
    ...
     
`man` uses the `less` command to display the manual contents, which can be confusing to use if you aren't familiar with it. Read about the `less` command below.

Man is unavailable in Git Bash on Windows. Instead use the Linux man pages online: [http://man.he.net/](http://man.he.net/)

## less

Shows the contents of a file or other input in segments, allowing you to scroll through them on the terminal. 

`less` will wait for keyboard commands to navigate the content. Use the following keys to scroll:

- Down Arrow / Return: scroll down
- Up Array: scroll up
- Spacebar: scroll down an entire page
- b: scroll up an entire page

Use the `q` key to quit when you want to exit `less`.